Fix Network Security Testing on Android and iOS (by @NowSecure) (#2042)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05g-Testing-Network-Communication.md

# Android Network Communication

Almost every Android app acts as a client to one or more remote services. As this network communication usually takes place over untrusted networks such as public Wi-Fi, classical network based-attacks become a potential issue.

Most modern mobile apps use variants of HTTP-based web services, as these protocols are well-documented and supported.

## Overview

### Android Network Security Configuration

Starting on Android 7.0 (API level 24), Android apps can customize their network security settings using the so-called [Network Security Configuration](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-config) feature which offers the following key capabilities:

> - **Cleartext traffic**: Protect apps from accidental usage of cleartext traffic (or enables it).
> - **Custom trust anchors**: Customize which Certificate Authorities (CA) are trusted for an app's secure connections. For example, trusting particular self-signed certificates or restricting the set of public CAs that the app trusts.
> - **Certificate pinning**: Restrict an app's secure connection to particular certificates.
> - **Debug-only overrides**: Safely debug secure connections in an app without added risk to the installed base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cleartext traffic**: Protect apps from accidental usage of cleartext traffic (or enables it).
- **Custom trust anchors**: Customize which Certificate Authorities (CAs) are trusted for an app's secure connections. For example, trusting particular self-signed certificates or restricting the set of public CAs that the app trusts.
- **Certificate pinning**: Restrict an app's secure connection to particular certificates.
- **Debug-only overrides**: Safely debug secure connections in an app without added risk to the installed base.
```

If an app defines a custom Network Security Configuration, you can obtain its location by searching for `android:networkSecurityConfig` in the AndroidManifest.xml file.

```xml
<application android:networkSecurityConfig="@xml/network_security_config"
```

In this case the file is located at `@xml` (equivalent to /res/xml) and has the name "network_security_config" (which might vary). You should be able to find it as "res/xml/network_security_config.xml". If a configuration exists, the following event should be visible in the [system logs](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#monitoring-system-logs):

```bash
D/NetworkSecurityConfig: Using Network Security Config from resource network_security_config
```

The Network Security Configuration is [XML-based](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-config#FileFormat) and can be used to configure app-wide and domain-specific settings:

- `base-config` applies to all connections that the app attempts to make.
- `domain-config` overrides `base-config` for specific domains (it can contain multiple `domain` entries).

> For example, the following configuration uses the `base-config` to prevent cleartext traffic for all domains. But it overrides that rule using a `domain-config`, explicitly allowing cleartext traffic for `localhost` and its subdomains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following configuration uses the `base-config` to prevent cleartext traffic for all domains. But it overrides that rule using a `domain-config`, explicitly allowing cleartext traffic for `localhost`.
```

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<network-security-config>
    <base-config cleartextTrafficPermitted="false" />
    <domain-config cleartextTrafficPermitted="true">

>         <domain includeSubdomains="true">localhost</domain>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <domain>localhost</domain>
```
localhost can't have subdomains.

### Static Analysis

#### Trust Anchors in the Network Security Configuration

> When running on Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher, apps targeting those API levels will use a default Network Security Configuration that doesn't trust any user supplied CAs, reducing the possibility of MITM attacks by luring users to install malicious CAs. However, this protection can be bypassed by using a custom Network Security Configuration with a custom trust anchor indicating that the app will trust user supplied CAs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications targeting Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher will use a default Network Security Configuration that doesn't trust any user supplied CAs, reducing the possibility of MITM attacks by luring users to install malicious CAs. However, this protection can be disabled by using a custom Network Security Configuration with a custom trust anchor indicating that the app will trust user supplied CAs.
```

> Use a decompiler (e.g. jadx or apktool) to confirm the target SDK version. After decoding the app you can look for the presence of `targetSDK` present in the file apktool.yml that was created in the output folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a decompiler (e.g. jadx or apktool) to confirm the target SDK version. After decoding the app you can look for the presence of `targetSDK` in the file apktool.yml that was created in the output folder.
```

Reviewer: apktool technically is a disassembler though, not a decompiler.

Author: This was one block I simply moved around I didn't see that so thanks for telling! We have to change it. I assume it just want to say: unpack and check that value in the android manifest.

> This is one of many cases where having a "Techniques" chapter we can refer back to will come handy. This way we don't have to explain that you need to unzip the APK, decode the Android Manifest..but you can achieve the same by ...blah blah We'd simply have "Checking a value from the Android Manifest" including all alternatives. And here we'd just say: `["Check that the value minsdk is ... in the Android Manifest"](linktotechniques#checking-a-value...)`.

> The Network Security Configuration should be analyzed to determine what settings are configured. The file is located inside the APK in the /res/xml/ folder with the name network_security_config.xml.

Reviewer: That's actually not necessary. You can call it whatever you want. So what about
```suggestion
The Network Security Configuration should be analyzed to determine what settings are configured. The name of the file can be found in the `android:networkSecurityConfig` attribute of the `<application>` tag inside the Android Manifest. The file can then be found in the /res/xml/ folder with the .xml extension.
```
Though it's possible to store it in other folders as well, if you really want to I think.

> If there are custom `<trust-anchors>` present in a `<base-config>` or `<domain-config>`, that define a `<certificates src="user">` the application will trust user supplied CAs for those particular domains or for all domains. Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are custom `<trust-anchors>` present in a `<base-config>` or `<domain-config>` that define a `<certificates src="user">`, the application will trust user supplied CAs for those particular domains or for all domains. Example:
```

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<network-security-config>
    <base-config>
        <trust-anchors>
            <certificates src="system" />
            <certificates src="user" />
        </trust-anchors>
    </base-config>
    <domain-config>
        <domain includeSubdomains="false">owasp.org</domain>
        <trust-anchors>
            <certificates src="system" />
            <certificates src="user" />
        </trust-anchors>
        <pin-set expiration="2018/8/10">
            <!-- Hash of the public key (SubjectPublicKeyInfo of the X.509 certificate) of
            the Intermediate CA of the OWASP website server certificate -->
            <pin digest="SHA-256">YLh1dUR9y6Kja30RrAn7JKnbQG/uEtLMkBgFF2Fuihg=</pin>
            <!-- Hash of the public key (SubjectPublicKeyInfo of the X.509 certificate) of
            the Root CA of the OWASP website server certificate -->
            <pin digest="SHA-256">Vjs8r4z+80wjNcr1YKepWQboSIRi63WsWXhIMN+eWys=</pin>
        </pin-set>
    </domain-config>
</network-security-config>
```

> Is important to understand the precedence of entries. If a value is not set in a `<domain-config\>` entry or in a parent `<domain-config\>`, the configurations in place will be based on the `<base-config\>`, and lastly if not defined in this entry, the default configuration will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to understand the precedence of entries. If a value is not set in a `<domain-config>` entry or in a parent `<domain-config\>`, the configurations in place will be based on the `<base-config>`, and lastly, if not defined in this entry, the default configuration will be used.
```

### Static Analysis

#### Verifying the Target SDK Version

Applications targeting Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher will use a **default Network Security Configuration that doesn't trust any user supplied CAs**, reducing the possibility of MITM attacks by luring users to install malicious CAs.

> [Decode the app using apktool](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#exploring-the-app-package) and verify that the `targetSdkVersion` in apktool.yml is equal or higher than `24`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Decode the app using apktool](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#exploring-the-app-package) and verify that the `targetSdkVersion` in apktool.yml is equal to or higher than `24`.
```

### Dynamic Analysis

> When testing an app targeting Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher it should be effectively applying the Network Security Configuration **unless the app targets API levels below 24** and you shouldn't able to see the decrypted HTTPS traffic at first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When testing an app targeting Android 7.0 (API level 24) or higher it should be effectively applying the Network Security Configuration and you shouldn't able to see the decrypted HTTPS traffic at first. However,  if the app targets API levels below 24, the app will automatically accept the installed user certificates.
```

### Static Analysis

#### Certificate Pinning in the Network Security Configuration

> To customize their network security settings in a safe, declarative configuration file without modifying app code, applications can use the [Network Security Configuration](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-config.html "Network Security Configuration documentation") that Android provides for versions 7.0 and above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize their network security settings in a safe, declarative configuration file without modifying app code, applications can use the [Network Security Configuration](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-config.html "Network Security Configuration documentation") that Android provides for versions 7.0 (API level 24) and above.
```

### Dynamic Analysis

Follow the instructions from ["Testing Endpoint Identify Verification > Dynamic Analysis"](#testing-endpoint-identify-verification-mstg-network-3). If doing so doesn't lead to traffic being proxied, it may mean that certificate pinning is actually implemented and all security measures are in place. Does the same happen for all domains?

As a quick smoke test, you can try to bypass certificate pinning using [objection](0x08-Testing-Tools.md#objection) as described in ["Bypassing Certificate Pinning"](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#bypassing-certificate-pinning). Pinning related APIs being hooked by objection should appear in objection's output.

![objection Android SSL Pinning Bypass](Images/Chapters/0x05b/android_ssl_pinning_bypass.png)

However, keep in mind that:

- the APIs might not be complete.
- if nothing is hooked, that doesn't necessarily mean that the app doesn't implement pinning.

> In both cases, the app or some of its components might implement pinning on a very custom way that it's [not implemented in objection](https://github.com/sensepost/objection/blob/master/agent/src/android/pinning.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both cases, the app or some of its components might implement custom pinning in a way that is [supported by objection](https://github.com/sensepost/objection/blob/master/agent/src/android/pinning.ts). Please check the static analysis section for specific pinning indicators and more in-depth testing.
```
